Fruit and vegetables should be an important part of your daily diet. They are naturally good and contain vitamins and minerals that can help to keep you healthy. They can also help protect against some diseases.
Most Australians will benefit from eating more fruit and vegetables as part of a well-balanced, regular diet and a healthy, active lifestyle. There are many varieties of fruit and vegetables available and many ways to prepare, cook and serve them.
You should eat at least five serves of vegetables and two serves of fruit each day. Choose different colours and varieties.
A serve of vegetables is about one cup of raw salad vegetables or 1/2 cup of cooked.
A serve of fruit is about one medium piece, 2 small pieces of 1 cup canned (no added sugar).
Fruits and vegetables contain many vitamins and minerals that are good for your health. These include vitamins A (beta-carotene), C and E, magnesium, zinc, phosphorous and folic acid. Folic acid may reduce blood levels of homocysteine, a substance that may be a risk factor for coronary heart disease.
Legumes or pulses contain nutrients that are especially valuable. Legumes need to be cooked before they are eaten – this improves their nutritional quality, aids digestion and eliminates any harmful toxins.
You will get the most health benefits and protection against disease if you eat a wide variety of fruits and vegetables. The National Health and Medical Research Council Australian dietary guidelines recommend that adults eat at least five kinds of vegetable and two kinds of fruit every day.
Foods of similar colours generally contain similar protective compounds. Try to eat a rainbow of colourful fruits and vegetables every day to get the full range of health benefits.
Red foods, like tomatoes and watermelon, contain lycopene, which is thought to be important for fighting prostate cancer and heart disease. Green vegetables, like spinach and kale, contain lutein and zeaxanthin, which may help protect against age-related eye disease. Blue and purple foods, like blueberries and eggplant, contain anthocyanins, which may help protect the body from cancer
White foods, like cauliflower, contain sulforaphane and may also help protect against some cancers.
Of course to keep the most life giving nutrients, it is important to not cook your vegetables or fruit to death! The more of these that can be eaten raw (or steamed) the better it is. Nature gives them to us as a complete food, as often some of the most important nutrients are just under the skin, so by peeling vegetables that only need scrubbing clean, you lose these.
If they are to be cooked, use coconut oil, as this is the only oil that does not spoil at high temperatures.
Eating seasonally and locally also means that you are getting the best quality, as the foods will not have been transported far. The closer to the vegetable garden your plate is, the fresher your food will be.
Fruit must be eaten ripe, not over or under ripe for the most benefit. If you have even tried to catch a pear like this, you will know it is not as simple as it sounds!
Also it is best to eat fruit before and not after other foods.
Two of the easiest ways to get plenty of fruit and vegetables in your diet is to juice them and /or make smoothies – dairy free for best health giving results. Rather than looking to common standard recommendations of 5 per day, your daily consumption needs to be at least 50% of your complete food intake, leaning towards more vegetables than fruit.
Your body will thank you for eating more fruit and vegetables, and as it adjusts to this you will thank your body – for all the energy and vitality you have.
To maximise nutrients and appeal, buy and serve different types of fruit and vegetables. Try to buy fruits and vegetables that are in season, and choose for freshness and quality.
Eat with the seasons; this is nature’s way of making sure our bodies get a healthy mix of nutrients and plant chemicals.
Try something new; try new recipes and buy new fruit or vegetables as part of your weekly shopping.
Let colours guide you; get different combinations of nutrients by putting a ‘rainbow’ of colours (green, white, yellow, orange, blue, purple, red) on your plate.
Our ingredients profiles provide more information on fruits and vegetables.
Vegetables are often cooked, although some kinds are eaten raw. Cooking and processing can damage some nutrients and phytochemicals in plant foods.
Suggestions to get the best out of your fruit and vegetables include:
Eat raw vegetables and fruits if possible.
Try fruit or vegetables pureed into smoothies.
Use a sharp knife to cut fresh fruits to avoid bruising.
Cut off only the inedible parts of vegetables – sometimes the best nutrients are found in the skin, just below the skin or in the leaves.
Use stir-fry, grill, microwave, bake or steam methods with non-stick cookware and mono-unsaturated oils.
Do not overcook, to reduce nutrient loss.
Serve meals with vegetable pestos, salsas, chutneys and vinegars in place of sour cream, butter and creamy sauces.
Some nutrients such as carotenoids may actually be increased if food is cooked. For example, tomato has more carotenoids, especially lycopene, when it is cooked – a good reason to prepare fruits and vegetables in a variety of ways.
Once you’ve prepared and cooked your vegetables and fruit, spend some time on presentation. People are more likely to enjoy a meal if it’s full of variety and visually appealing, as well as tasty. Sit at the table to eat and enjoy your food without distractions like television.
Different fruits and vegetables contain different nutrients. The Australian dietary guidelines recommend that adults eat at least five kinds of vegetable and two kinds of fruit every day. A national nutrition survey conducted by the Australian Government showed that Australians of all ages do not eat enough vegetables and fruit.
Children have a smaller stomach capacity and higher energy needs than adults. They cannot eat the same serving sizes as adults. However, you should encourage your children to eat a variety of fruits and vegetables. By eating well, your children will have the energy they need to play, concentrate better, learn, sleep better and build stronger teeth and bones. Building good habits in their early years can also provide the protection of a healthy diet throughout their lives.
The Australian dietary guidelines have recommendations on how many vegetables and fruits adults, children and adolescents of different ages require.
1095