Fruit and vegetables should be an important part of your daily diet. They are naturally good and contain vitamins and minerals that can help to keep you healthy. They can also help protect against some diseases.
Most Australians will benefit from eating more fruit and vegetables as part of a well-balanced, regular diet and a healthy, active lifestyle. There are many varieties of fruit and vegetables available and many ways to prepare, cook and serve them.
You should eat at least five serves of vegetables and two serves of fruit each day. Choose different colours and varieties.
A serve of vegetables is about one cup of raw salad vegetables or 1/2 cup of cooked.
A serve of fruit is about one medium piece, 2 small pieces of 1 cup canned (no added sugar).
Fruits and vegetables contain many vitamins and minerals that are good for your health. These include vitamins A (beta-carotene), C and E, magnesium, zinc, phosphorous and folic acid. Folic acid may reduce blood levels of homocysteine, a substance that may be a risk factor for coronary heart disease.
Legumes or pulses contain nutrients that are especially valuable. Legumes need to be cooked before they are eaten – this improves their nutritional quality, aids digestion and eliminates any harmful toxins.
You will get the most health benefits and protection against disease if you eat a wide variety of fruits and vegetables. The National Health and Medical Research Council Australian dietary guidelines recommend that adults eat at least five kinds of vegetable and two kinds of fruit every day.
Foods of similar colours generally contain similar protective compounds. Try to eat a rainbow of colourful fruits and vegetables every day to get the full range of health benefits.
Red foods, like tomatoes and watermelon, contain lycopene, which is thought to be important for fighting prostate cancer and heart disease. Green vegetables, like spinach and kale, contain lutein and zeaxanthin, which may help protect against age-related eye disease. Blue and purple foods, like blueberries and eggplant, contain anthocyanins, which may help protect the body from cancer
White foods, like cauliflower, contain sulforaphane and may also help protect against some cancers.
Of course to keep the most life giving nutrients, it is important to not cook your vegetables or fruit to death! The more of these that can be eaten raw (or steamed) the better it is. Nature gives them to us as a complete food, as often some of the most important nutrients are just under the skin, so by peeling vegetables that only need scrubbing clean, you lose these.
If they are to be cooked, use coconut oil, as this is the only oil that does not spoil at high temperatures.
Eating seasonally and locally also means that you are getting the best quality, as the foods will not have been transported far. The closer to the vegetable garden your plate is, the fresher your food will be.
Fruit must be eaten ripe, not over or under ripe for the most benefit. If you have even tried to catch a pear like this, you will know it is not as simple as it sounds!
Also it is best to eat fruit before and not after other foods.
538